peerDAS: Initial refactor of recover_polynomial() (#3591)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/_features/eip7594/polynomial-commitments-sampling.md

Reviewer: Could we make a variable for `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2`. Maybe `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_EXT_BLOB`?

Author: Totally! 1e41a6bc6

## Reconstruction

### `construct_vanishing_polynomial`

```python
def construct_vanishing_polynomial(missing_cell_ids: Sequence[CellID]) -> Tuple[
        Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
        Sequence[BLSFieldElement]]:
    """
    Given the cells that are missing from the data, compute the polynomial that vanishes at every point that

>     corresponds to a missing field element

Reviewer: Punctuation.
```suggestion
    corresponds to a missing field element.
```

    """
    # Get the small domain
    roots_of_unity_reduced = compute_roots_of_unity(CELLS_PER_BLOB)

    # Compute polynomial that vanishes at all the missing cells (over the small domain)
    short_zero_poly = vanishing_polynomialcoeff([
        roots_of_unity_reduced[reverse_bits(missing_cell_id, CELLS_PER_BLOB)]
        for missing_cell_id in missing_cell_ids
    ])

    # Extend vanishing polynomial to full domain using the closed form of the vanishing polynomial over a coset
    zero_poly_coeff = [0] * (FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2)

>     for (i, coeff) in enumerate(short_zero_poly):

Reviewer: We don't need parentheses here.
```suggestion
    for i, coeff in enumerate(short_zero_poly):
```

        zero_poly_coeff[i * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL] = coeff

    # Compute evaluations of the extended vanishing polynomial
    zero_poly_eval = fft_field(zero_poly_coeff,
                               compute_roots_of_unity(2 * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB))
    zero_poly_eval_brp = bit_reversal_permutation(zero_poly_eval)

    # Sanity check
    for cell_id in range(CELLS_PER_BLOB):
        start = cell_id * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL
        end = (cell_id + 1) * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL
        if cell_id in missing_cell_ids:

>             assert zero_poly_eval_brp[start:end] == [0] * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL

Reviewer: I prefer the style of the `else` block. We could do the same thing here:
```suggestion
            assert all(a == 0 for a in zero_poly_eval_brp[start:end])
```

        else:  # cell_id in cell_ids
            assert all(a != 0 for a in zero_poly_eval_brp[start:end])

    return zero_poly_coeff, zero_poly_eval, zero_poly_eval_brp
```

### `recover_shifted_data`

```python
def recover_shifted_data(cell_ids: Sequence[CellID],
                         cells: Sequence[Cell],
                         zero_poly_eval: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                         zero_poly_coeff: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                         roots_of_unity_extended: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Tuple[
                             Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                             Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                             BLSFieldElement]:
    """

>     Given Z(x), return polynomial Q_1(x)=(E*Z)(k*x) and Q_2(x)=Z(k*x) and k^{-1}

Reviewer: Punctuation.
```suggestion
    Given Z(x), return polynomial Q_1(x)=(E*Z)(k*x) and Q_2(x)=Z(k*x) and k^{-1}.
```

    """

>     shift_factor = BLSFieldElement(PRIMITIVE_ROOT_OF_UNITY)

Reviewer: The c-kzg prototype currently uses 5, but I think it makes sense to use `PRIMITIVE_ROOT_OF_UNITY` (7); I will update c-kzg to use this. I'm not exactly sure if it makes a difference. Also, we call it `scale_factor` which I slightly prefer.

Reviewer 2: 5 is not a primitive root of unity. This was a mistake we had in some research code some years ago. (Not important here but it is in the rest of the code -- we need to use the same sequence of roots of unity everywhere)

Here the only thing that matters is that it's not in our evaluation domain, so there is no risk that the vanishing polynomial is zero anywhere on the shifted domain.

    algorithm uses FFTs to recover cells faster than using Lagrange implementation, as can be seen here:
    https://ethresear.ch/t/reed-solomon-erasure-code-recovery-in-n-log-2-n-time-with-ffts/3039

    A faster version thanks to Qi Zhou can be found here:
    https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/51b530a53bd4147d123ab3e390a9d08605c2cdb8/polynomial_reconstruction/polynomial_reconstruction_danksharding.py

    Public method.
    """
    assert len(cell_ids) == len(cells_bytes)
    # Check we have enough cells to be able to perform the reconstruction
    assert CELLS_PER_BLOB / 2 <= len(cell_ids) <= CELLS_PER_BLOB
    # Check for duplicates
    assert len(cell_ids) == len(set(cell_ids))

    # Get the extended domain
    roots_of_unity_extended = compute_roots_of_unity(FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_EXT_BLOB)

    # Convert from bytes to cells
    cells = [bytes_to_cell(cell_bytes) for cell_bytes in cells_bytes]

    missing_cell_ids = [cell_id for cell_id in range(CELLS_PER_BLOB) if cell_id not in cell_ids]
    zero_poly_coeff, zero_poly_eval, zero_poly_eval_brp = construct_vanishing_polynomial(missing_cell_ids)

>     eval_shifted_extended_evaluation, eval_shifted_zero_poly, shift_inv = \
>         recover_shifted_data(cell_ids, cells, zero_poly_eval, zero_poly_coeff, roots_of_unity_extended)

Reviewer 3: I know, but...
```suggestion
    eval_shifted_extended_evaluation, eval_shifted_zero_poly, shift_inv = recover_shifted_data(
        cell_ids,
        cells,
        zero_poly_eval,
        zero_poly_coeff,
        roots_of_unity_extended,
    )
```

    # Compute (E*Z)(x)
    extended_evaluation_times_zero = [BLSFieldElement(int(a) * int(b) % BLS_MODULUS)
                                      for a, b in zip(zero_poly_eval, extended_evaluation)]

    extended_evaluations_fft = fft_field(extended_evaluation_times_zero, roots_of_unity_extended, inv=True)

    # Compute (E*Z)(k*x)
    shifted_extended_evaluation = shift_polynomialcoeff(extended_evaluations_fft, shift_factor)
    # Compute Z(k*x)
    shifted_zero_poly = shift_polynomialcoeff(zero_poly_coeff, shift_factor)

    eval_shifted_extended_evaluation = fft_field(shifted_extended_evaluation, roots_of_unity_extended)
    eval_shifted_zero_poly = fft_field(shifted_zero_poly, roots_of_unity_extended)

    return eval_shifted_extended_evaluation, eval_shifted_zero_poly, shift_inv
```

### `recover_original_data`

```python
def recover_original_data(eval_shifted_extended_evaluation: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                          eval_shifted_zero_poly: Sequence[BLSFieldElement],
                          shift_inv: BLSFieldElement,
                          roots_of_unity_extended: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Sequence[BLSFieldElement]:
    """

>     Given Q_1, Q_2 and k^{-1}, compute P(x)

Reviewer: Punctuation.
```suggestion
    Given Q_1, Q_2 and k^{-1}, compute P(x).
```

    reconstructed_data = bit_reversal_permutation(fft_field(reconstructed_poly, roots_of_unity_extended))

    return reconstructed_data
```

### `recover_polynomial`

```python
def recover_polynomial(cell_ids: Sequence[CellID],
                       cells_bytes: Sequence[Vector[Bytes32, FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL]]) -> Polynomial:
    """
    Recover original polynomial from 2 * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL evaluations, half of which can be missing. This
    algorithm uses FFTs to recover cells faster than using Lagrange implementation, as can be seen here:
    https://ethresear.ch/t/reed-solomon-erasure-code-recovery-in-n-log-2-n-time-with-ffts/3039

    A faster version thanks to Qi Zhou can be found here:
    https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/51b530a53bd4147d123ab3e390a9d08605c2cdb8/polynomial_reconstruction/polynomial_reconstruction_danksharding.py

    Public method.
    """
    assert len(cell_ids) == len(cells_bytes)

    # Get the extended domain
    roots_of_unity_extended = compute_roots_of_unity(2 * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB)

    # Convert from bytes to cells
    cells = [bytes_to_cell(cell_bytes) for cell_bytes in cells_bytes]

>     assert len(cells) >= CELLS_PER_BLOB // 2

Reviewer: I think it would make sense to move this directly after:
```python
assert len(cell_ids) == len(cells_bytes)
```
And change it to following so there's an upper bound.
```python
assert CELLS_PER_BLOB / 2 <= len(cells) <= CELLS_PER_BLOB
```

Author: Addressed in e3b83d545

>     missing_cell_ids = [cell_id for cell_id in range(CELLS_PER_BLOB) if cell_id not in cell_ids]

Reviewer: Should we handle the situation where there are duplicate cell ids? Maybe something like:
```python
assert list(set(cell_ids) == cell_ids
```

Author: Addressed in e3b83d545

    zero_poly_coeff, zero_poly_eval, zero_poly_eval_brp = construct_vanishing_polynomial(missing_cell_ids)

    eval_shifted_extended_evaluation, eval_shifted_zero_poly, shift_inv = \
        recover_shifted_data(cell_ids, cells, zero_poly_eval, zero_poly_coeff, roots_of_unity_extended)

>     reconstructed_data = \
>         recover_original_data(eval_shifted_extended_evaluation, eval_shifted_zero_poly, shift_inv,
>                               roots_of_unity_extended)

Reviewer 3: we don't use `\`.
```suggestion
    reconstructed_data = recover_original_data(
        eval_shifted_extended_evaluation,
        eval_shifted_zero_poly,
        shift_inv,
        roots_of_unity_extended,
    )
```
